plugins/appium-automation/skills/appium-automation/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: appium-automation
description: Cross-platform mobile app automation using Appium. Supports iOS Simulator, Android Emulator, and Mac Catalyst. Use for UI testing, reproducing issues, and validating fixes on device. Also use when the user asks what's on screen, to describe the app, read the UI, capture a screenshot, inspect visible elements, or asks "what do you see".
---

# Appium Automation Skill

Cross-platform mobile automation agent for iOS, Android, and Mac Catalyst apps.

## When to Use

- ✅ Automating UI interactions on iOS Simulator
- ✅ Automating UI interactions on Android Emulator
- ✅ Testing Mac Catalyst apps
- ✅ Reproducing issues on device
- ✅ Validating PR fixes with real device testing
- ✅ Exploring app UI structure (list elements, buttons)
- ✅ **Screen reading/inspection**: When user asks "what do you see", "what's on screen", "describe the app", "read the UI", or "capture a screenshot"

## When NOT to Use

- ❌ Writing NUnit UI tests → Use `uitest-coding-agent`
- ❌ Full PR workflow → Use `pr` agent
- ❌ Just building/deploying Sandbox → Use `sandbox-agent`

## Important: AutomationId Setup

For reliable element targeting, **add `AutomationId` to your XAML elements**:

```xml
<!-- Before: No way to reliably target this element -->
<Entry Placeholder="Enter amount" />

<!-- After: Can target with --tap AmountEntry or --type AmountEntry "100" -->
<Entry AutomationId="AmountEntry" Placeholder="Enter amount" />
```

### Recommended Pattern

Add `AutomationId` to all interactive elements:

```xml
<Entry AutomationId="SubtotalEntry" ... />
<Button AutomationId="CalculateButton" ... />
<Label AutomationId="ResultLabel" ... />
<Slider AutomationId="TipSlider" ... />
```

### Platform Mapping

| Platform | AutomationId maps to |
|----------|---------------------|
| iOS | `name` attribute |
| Android | `resource-id` (e.g., `com.app:id/SubtotalEntry`) |
| Mac Catalyst | `identifier` attribute |

Without `AutomationId`, you must use `--tap-text` or `--tap-button` which are less reliable.

## Prerequisites

### 1. Appium Server

```bash
npm install -g appium
appium driver install xcuitest      # iOS/Catalyst
appium driver install uiautomator2  # Android
appium driver install mac2          # Mac Catalyst
```

**Note**: Appium auto-starts if not running when you run an automation command.

### 2. Python Dependencies

```bash
pip install Appium-Python-Client selenium
```

### 3. Platform Requirements

| Platform | Requirements |
|----------|--------------|
| iOS | Xcode, booted iOS Simulator |
| Android | Android SDK, running emulator or connected device |
| Mac Catalyst | Xcode, app installed on Mac, **WebDriverAgentMac built** (see below) |

### 4. Mac Catalyst Setup (Required for Mac Catalyst only)

The Mac2 driver requires WebDriverAgentMac to be built before first use:

```bash
# Navigate to the WebDriverAgentMac project
cd ~/.appium/node_modules/appium-mac2-driver/WebDriverAgentMac

# Build WebDriverAgentRunner for macOS
xcodebuild -project WebDriverAgentMac.xcodeproj \
  -scheme WebDriverAgentRunner \
  -destination 'platform=macOS' \
  -configuration Debug \
  build
```

**Note**: This only needs to be done once after installing the mac2 driver. If you update the driver (`appium driver update mac2`), rebuild WebDriverAgentMac.

## Quick Start

### Start Appium Server

```bash
# Start in background
appium --relaxed-security &

# Or use the script
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py --start-appium
```

### List Available Devices

```bash
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py --list-devices
```

### Boot iOS Simulator

```bash
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py --boot-simulator "iPhone 16 Pro"
```

## CLI Reference

### Basic Syntax

```bash
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py \
  --platform <ios|android|maccatalyst> \
  --app-id <bundle.id.or.package> \
  [actions...]
```

### Actions

| Action | Description | Example |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--tap ID` | Tap element by AutomationId | `--tap SubmitButton` |
| `--tap-button TEXT` | Tap button by visible text | `--tap-button "Sign In"` |
| `--tap-text TEXT` | Tap any element with text | `--tap-text "Welcome"` |
| `--tap-like PARTIAL` | Tap element with partial ID match | `--tap-like Submit` |
| `--double-tap ID` | Double-tap element | `--double-tap ImageView` |
| `--long-press ID` | Long press element | `--long-press ListItem` |
| `--type ID TEXT` | Type into text field (clears first) | `--type EmailField "user@test.com"` |
| `--clear ID` | Clear text from field | `--clear SearchField` |
| `--get-text ID` | Get element text content | `--get-text ResultLabel` |
| `--exists ID` | Check if element exists | `--exists ErrorMessage` |
| `--is-enabled ID` | Check if element is enabled | `--is-enabled SubmitButton` |
| `--is-visible ID` | Check if element is visible | `--is-visible LoadingSpinner` |
| `--expect ID TEXT` | Assert element contains text | `--expect TotalLabel "€ 100"` |
| `--wait N` | Wait N seconds | `--wait 2` |
| `--wait-for ID` | Wait for element to appear | `--wait-for LoadingSpinner` |

### Keyboard & Input

| Action | Description | Example |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--dismiss-keyboard` | Dismiss on-screen keyboard | `--dismiss-keyboard` |
| `--press-key KEY` | Press key (Enter/Tab/Escape) | `--press-key Enter` |

### Alerts & Dialogs

| Action | Description | Example |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--accept-alert` | Accept/tap OK on alert | `--accept-alert` |
| `--dismiss-alert` | Dismiss/cancel alert | `--dismiss-alert` |
| `--get-alert` | Get alert text | `--get-alert` |

### Sliders

| Action | Description | Example |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--set-slider ID PCT` | Set slider to percentage (0-100) | `--set-slider TipSlider 25` |
| `--drag ID X Y [SEC]` | Drag element by offset | `--drag Handle 100 0 0.5` |

### Gestures

| Gesture | Description | Example |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `--swipe DIR` | Swipe up/down/left/right | `--swipe up` |
| `--scroll DIR` | Scroll screen in direction | `--scroll down` |
| `--scroll-to ID` | Scroll until element visible | `--scroll-to BottomButton` |
| `--tap-coords X Y` | Tap at coordinates | `--tap-coords 100 200` |

### App Lifecycle

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `--activate` | Bring app to foreground |
| `--terminate` | Close/kill app |
| `--install PATH` | Install .app or .apk |

### Debug & Inspection

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `--screenshot PATH` | Save screenshot |
| `--page-source` | Print XML element tree |
| `--list-buttons` | List all button labels |
| `--list-elements` | List all elements with IDs |
| `--find-text TEXT` | Find elements with text |
| `--get-rect ID` | Get element position/size |

## Common Workflows

### .NET MAUI iOS Testing

```bash
# 1. Boot simulator and start Appium
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py --boot-simulator "iPhone 16 Pro"
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py --start-appium

# 2. Build and install app (using dotnet)
dotnet build src/Controls/samples/Controls.Sample.Sandbox -f net9.0-ios
xcrun simctl install booted path/to/Controls.Sample.Sandbox.app

# 3. Automate
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py \
  --platform ios \
  --app-id com.microsoft.maui.sandbox \
  --tap NavigateButton --wait 1 --get-text ResultLabel
```

### .NET MAUI Android Testing

```bash
# 1. Start emulator and Appium
emulator -avd Pixel_6_API_33 &
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py --start-appium

# 2. Build and install (IMPORTANT: use EmbedAssembliesIntoApk for automation)
dotnet build src/Controls/samples/Controls.Sample.Sandbox -f net9.0-android -p:EmbedAssembliesIntoApk=true
adb install path/to/com.microsoft.maui.sandbox-Signed.apk

# 3. Automate
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py \
  --platform android \
  --app-id com.microsoft.maui.sandbox \
  --tap NavigateButton --wait 1 --screenshot result.png
```

### Chained Actions

```bash
# Multiple actions in sequence (RECOMMENDED for performance)
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py \
  --platform ios --app-id com.example.app \
  --tap UsernameField --type UsernameField "testuser" \
  --tap PasswordField --type PasswordField "password123" \
  --tap-button "Sign In" --wait 2 \
  --get-text WelcomeLabel
```

> **Performance Tip**: Chain multiple operations in a single CLI call. Each invocation creates a new Appium session (~10-50s on iOS). Chaining operations runs them all in one session, making subsequent operations nearly instant.

### Debug: Explore App Structure

```bash
# List all buttons
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py \
  --platform ios --app-id com.example.app \
  --list-buttons

# Full element tree
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py \
  --platform ios --app-id com.example.app \
  --page-source > elements.xml
```

## Python API

```python
from appium_agent import AppiumAgent

# iOS
with AppiumAgent(platform="ios", app_id="com.microsoft.maui.sandbox") as agent:
    agent.tap("NavigateButton")
    agent.type_text("SearchField", "hello world")
    agent.wait(1)
    result = agent.get_text("ResultLabel")
    agent.screenshot("result.png")

# Android
with AppiumAgent(platform="android", app_id="com.microsoft.maui.sandbox") as agent:
    agent.tap("SubmitButton")
    agent.swipe("up")
    buttons = agent.list_buttons()

# Mac Catalyst
with AppiumAgent(platform="maccatalyst", app_id="com.example.macapp") as agent:
    agent.tap_button("Preferences")
```

## .NET MAUI Element Identification

In .NET MAUI, use `AutomationId` for element identification:

```xml
<Button Text="Submit" AutomationId="SubmitButton" />
<Entry Placeholder="Email" AutomationId="EmailField" />
<Label x:Name="resultLabel" AutomationId="ResultLabel" />
```

The agent finds elements by:
1. `AutomationId` (accessibility ID)
2. `x:Name` (name attribute)
3. Visible text (label/text attribute)

## Troubleshooting

### "No booted iOS simulator found"

```bash
xcrun simctl boot "iPhone 16 Pro"
# or
python automate.py --boot-simulator "iPhone 16 Pro"
```

### "No Android device/emulator found"

```bash
# Start emulator
emulator -avd <avd_name> &

# Or check connected devices
adb devices
```

### "Appium server not running"

```bash
appium --relaxed-security &
# or
python automate.py --start-appium
```

### Element not found

1. Use `--list-buttons` to see available buttons
2. Use `--list-elements` to see all elements with IDs
3. Use `--page-source` to get full XML tree
4. Verify `AutomationId` is set in XAML

### Android "Fast Deployment" crash

**Symptom**: App crashes immediately on launch with error:
```
No assemblies found in '.../__override__/arm64-v8a' or '<unavailable>'. 
Assuming this is part of Fast Deployment. Exiting...
```

**Cause**: Debug builds use "Fast Deployment" which doesn't embed assemblies in the APK. The assemblies are pushed separately by Visual Studio/dotnet tooling. When launched via Appium (outside VS), the app can't find the assemblies.

**Fix**: Build with embedded assemblies:
```bash
dotnet build -f net9.0-android -p:EmbedAssembliesIntoApk=true
```

Or use a Release build which embeds assemblies by default.

**Note**: The agent already sets `appium:noReset=true` by default to preserve app state between sessions.

### Slow performance / Session startup

**Symptom**: Each CLI call takes 10-50 seconds on iOS.

**Cause**: Each CLI invocation creates a new Appium/WebDriverAgent session. Session startup is slow, especially on iOS (~10-50s).

**Fix 1**: Use session caching with `--keep-session` and `--reuse-session`:
```bash
# First call creates session and keeps it alive (~10s)
python automate.py --platform ios --app-id com.example --keep-session --tap Field1

# Subsequent calls reuse the session (~2s each!)
python automate.py --platform ios --app-id com.example --reuse-session --keep-session --type Field1 "text"
python automate.py --platform ios --app-id com.example --reuse-session --keep-session --list-elements

# When done, end the session
python automate.py --end-session
```

**Fix 2**: Chain multiple operations in a single CLI call:
```bash
# 1 session for all operations - executed IN ORDER specified!
python automate.py --platform ios --app-id com.example \
  --tap Field1 --type Field1 "text" --get-text Result --expect Result "success"
```

**Note**: Actions are executed in the order you specify on the command line. You can interleave actions as needed:
```bash
# Type, check value, type more, check again
--type Amount 100 --get-text Total --type Tip 20 --expect Total "€ 120"
```

## Assertions

The `--expect` action is used for automated testing. It checks if an element contains expected text:

```bash
# Pass: exits 0
python automate.py --platform ios --app-id com.example --expect Label "expected text"

# Fail: prints failure and exits 1
python automate.py --platform ios --app-id com.example --expect Label "wrong"
# Output: ✗ expect 'Label' contains 'wrong': FAIL (actual: expected text)
```

Use `--expect` in test scripts to verify UI state after actions:
```bash
python automate.py --platform ios --app-id com.example \
  --type SubtotalEntry 100 \
  --set-slider TipSlider 20 \
  --expect TipAmountValue "€ 20,00" \
  --expect TotalValue "€ 120,00"
```

## Platform Feature Matrix

| Feature | iOS | Android | Mac Catalyst |
|---------|-----|---------|--------------|
| tap | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| type_text | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| swipe | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| long_press | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| double_tap | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| set_slider | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| expect | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| dismiss_keyboard | ✅ | ✅ | ❌ |
| accept_alert | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| press_back | ❌ | ✅ | ❌ |
| orientation | ✅ | ✅ | ❌ |

Commit message:

Update appium skill: avoid screenshots, recommend AutomationId
- Don't use --screenshot to read the screen unless user explicitly asks
- Use --list-elements, --list-buttons, --page-source instead
- Suggest adding AutomationId when elements are hard to target

plugins/appium-automation/skills/appium-automation/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: appium-automation
description: Cross-platform mobile app automation using Appium. Supports iOS Simulator, Android Emulator, and Mac Catalyst. Use for UI testing, reproducing issues, and validating fixes on device.
---

# Appium Automation Skill

Cross-platform mobile automation agent for iOS, Android, and Mac Catalyst apps.

## When to Use

- ✅ Automating UI interactions on iOS Simulator
- ✅ Automating UI interactions on Android Emulator
- ✅ Testing Mac Catalyst apps
- ✅ Reproducing issues on device
- ✅ Validating PR fixes with real device testing
- ✅ Exploring app UI structure (use `--list-elements`, `--list-buttons`, `--page-source`)

## When NOT to Use

- ❌ Writing NUnit UI tests → Use `uitest-coding-agent`
- ❌ Full PR workflow → Use `pr` agent
- ❌ Just building/deploying Sandbox → Use `sandbox-agent`

## Important Guidelines

### 🚫 Avoid Screenshots for Reading the Screen

**Do NOT use `--screenshot` to read or understand the UI** unless the user explicitly asks for a screenshot. Instead, use:
- `--list-elements` — List all elements with their IDs and text
- `--list-buttons` — List all button labels
- `--page-source` — Get the full XML element tree
- `--get-text ID` — Get text from a specific element

These are faster, more accurate, and consume less resources than screenshots.

### 💡 Recommend Adding AutomationId

When elements are hard to target (e.g., `id=None` or relying on text matching), **suggest to the user that they add `AutomationId` to their XAML elements**. This makes automation much more reliable.

Example suggestion:
> "I notice some elements don't have AutomationId set. Would you like me to help add AutomationId attributes to your XAML? This will make UI automation more reliable."

## Important: AutomationId Setup

For reliable element targeting, **add `AutomationId` to your XAML elements**:

```xml
<!-- Before: No way to reliably target this element -->
<Entry Placeholder="Enter amount" />

<!-- After: Can target with --tap AmountEntry or --type AmountEntry "100" -->
<Entry AutomationId="AmountEntry" Placeholder="Enter amount" />
```

### Recommended Pattern

Add `AutomationId` to all interactive elements:

```xml
<Entry AutomationId="SubtotalEntry" ... />
<Button AutomationId="CalculateButton" ... />
<Label AutomationId="ResultLabel" ... />
<Slider AutomationId="TipSlider" ... />
```

### Platform Mapping

| Platform | AutomationId maps to |
|----------|---------------------|
| iOS | `name` attribute |
| Android | `resource-id` (e.g., `com.app:id/SubtotalEntry`) |
| Mac Catalyst | `identifier` attribute |

Without `AutomationId`, you must use `--tap-text` or `--tap-button` which are less reliable.

## Prerequisites

### 1. Appium Server

```bash
npm install -g appium
appium driver install xcuitest      # iOS/Catalyst
appium driver install uiautomator2  # Android
appium driver install mac2          # Mac Catalyst
```

**Note**: Appium auto-starts if not running when you run an automation command.

### 2. Python Dependencies

```bash
pip install Appium-Python-Client selenium
```

### 3. Platform Requirements

| Platform | Requirements |
|----------|--------------|
| iOS | Xcode, booted iOS Simulator |
| Android | Android SDK, running emulator or connected device |
| Mac Catalyst | Xcode, app installed on Mac, **WebDriverAgentMac built** (see below) |

### 4. Mac Catalyst Setup (Required for Mac Catalyst only)

The Mac2 driver requires WebDriverAgentMac to be built before first use:

```bash
# Navigate to the WebDriverAgentMac project
cd ~/.appium/node_modules/appium-mac2-driver/WebDriverAgentMac

# Build WebDriverAgentRunner for macOS
xcodebuild -project WebDriverAgentMac.xcodeproj \
  -scheme WebDriverAgentRunner \
  -destination 'platform=macOS' \
  -configuration Debug \
  build
```

**Note**: This only needs to be done once after installing the mac2 driver. If you update the driver (`appium driver update mac2`), rebuild WebDriverAgentMac.

## Quick Start

### Start Appium Server

```bash
# Start in background
appium --relaxed-security &

# Or use the script
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py --start-appium
```

### List Available Devices

```bash
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py --list-devices
```

### Boot iOS Simulator

```bash
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py --boot-simulator "iPhone 16 Pro"
```

## CLI Reference

### Basic Syntax

```bash
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py \
  --platform <ios|android|maccatalyst> \
  --app-id <bundle.id.or.package> \
  [actions...]
```

### Actions

| Action | Description | Example |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--tap ID` | Tap element by AutomationId | `--tap SubmitButton` |
| `--tap-button TEXT` | Tap button by visible text | `--tap-button "Sign In"` |
| `--tap-text TEXT` | Tap any element with text | `--tap-text "Welcome"` |
| `--tap-like PARTIAL` | Tap element with partial ID match | `--tap-like Submit` |
| `--double-tap ID` | Double-tap element | `--double-tap ImageView` |
| `--long-press ID` | Long press element | `--long-press ListItem` |
| `--type ID TEXT` | Type into text field (clears first) | `--type EmailField "user@test.com"` |
| `--clear ID` | Clear text from field | `--clear SearchField` |
| `--get-text ID` | Get element text content | `--get-text ResultLabel` |
| `--exists ID` | Check if element exists | `--exists ErrorMessage` |
| `--is-enabled ID` | Check if element is enabled | `--is-enabled SubmitButton` |
| `--is-visible ID` | Check if element is visible | `--is-visible LoadingSpinner` |
| `--expect ID TEXT` | Assert element contains text | `--expect TotalLabel "€ 100"` |
| `--wait N` | Wait N seconds | `--wait 2` |
| `--wait-for ID` | Wait for element to appear | `--wait-for LoadingSpinner` |

### Keyboard & Input

| Action | Description | Example |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--dismiss-keyboard` | Dismiss on-screen keyboard | `--dismiss-keyboard` |
| `--press-key KEY` | Press key (Enter/Tab/Escape) | `--press-key Enter` |

### Alerts & Dialogs

| Action | Description | Example |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--accept-alert` | Accept/tap OK on alert | `--accept-alert` |
| `--dismiss-alert` | Dismiss/cancel alert | `--dismiss-alert` |
| `--get-alert` | Get alert text | `--get-alert` |

### Sliders

| Action | Description | Example |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--set-slider ID PCT` | Set slider to percentage (0-100) | `--set-slider TipSlider 25` |
| `--drag ID X Y [SEC]` | Drag element by offset | `--drag Handle 100 0 0.5` |

### Gestures

| Gesture | Description | Example |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `--swipe DIR` | Swipe up/down/left/right | `--swipe up` |
| `--scroll DIR` | Scroll screen in direction | `--scroll down` |
| `--scroll-to ID` | Scroll until element visible | `--scroll-to BottomButton` |
| `--tap-coords X Y` | Tap at coordinates | `--tap-coords 100 200` |

### App Lifecycle

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `--activate` | Bring app to foreground |
| `--terminate` | Close/kill app |
| `--install PATH` | Install .app or .apk |

### Debug & Inspection

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `--screenshot PATH` | Save screenshot |
| `--page-source` | Print XML element tree |
| `--list-buttons` | List all button labels |
| `--list-elements` | List all elements with IDs |
| `--find-text TEXT` | Find elements with text |
| `--get-rect ID` | Get element position/size |

## Common Workflows

### .NET MAUI iOS Testing

```bash
# 1. Boot simulator and start Appium
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py --boot-simulator "iPhone 16 Pro"
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py --start-appium

# 2. Build and install app (using dotnet)
dotnet build src/Controls/samples/Controls.Sample.Sandbox -f net9.0-ios
xcrun simctl install booted path/to/Controls.Sample.Sandbox.app

# 3. Automate
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py \
  --platform ios \
  --app-id com.microsoft.maui.sandbox \
  --tap NavigateButton --wait 1 --get-text ResultLabel
```

### .NET MAUI Android Testing

```bash
# 1. Start emulator and Appium
emulator -avd Pixel_6_API_33 &
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py --start-appium

# 2. Build and install (IMPORTANT: use EmbedAssembliesIntoApk for automation)
dotnet build src/Controls/samples/Controls.Sample.Sandbox -f net9.0-android -p:EmbedAssembliesIntoApk=true
adb install path/to/com.microsoft.maui.sandbox-Signed.apk

# 3. Automate
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py \
  --platform android \
  --app-id com.microsoft.maui.sandbox \
  --tap NavigateButton --wait 1 --screenshot result.png
```

### Chained Actions

```bash
# Multiple actions in sequence (RECOMMENDED for performance)
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py \
  --platform ios --app-id com.example.app \
  --tap UsernameField --type UsernameField "testuser" \
  --tap PasswordField --type PasswordField "password123" \
  --tap-button "Sign In" --wait 2 \
  --get-text WelcomeLabel
```

> **Performance Tip**: Chain multiple operations in a single CLI call. Each invocation creates a new Appium session (~10-50s on iOS). Chaining operations runs them all in one session, making subsequent operations nearly instant.

### Debug: Explore App Structure

```bash
# List all buttons
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py \
  --platform ios --app-id com.example.app \
  --list-buttons

# Full element tree
python .github/skills/appium-automation/scripts/automate.py \
  --platform ios --app-id com.example.app \
  --page-source > elements.xml
```

## Python API

```python
from appium_agent import AppiumAgent

# iOS
with AppiumAgent(platform="ios", app_id="com.microsoft.maui.sandbox") as agent:
    agent.tap("NavigateButton")
    agent.type_text("SearchField", "hello world")
    agent.wait(1)
    result = agent.get_text("ResultLabel")
    agent.screenshot("result.png")

# Android
with AppiumAgent(platform="android", app_id="com.microsoft.maui.sandbox") as agent:
    agent.tap("SubmitButton")
    agent.swipe("up")
    buttons = agent.list_buttons()

# Mac Catalyst
with AppiumAgent(platform="maccatalyst", app_id="com.example.macapp") as agent:
    agent.tap_button("Preferences")
```

## .NET MAUI Element Identification

In .NET MAUI, use `AutomationId` for element identification:

```xml
<Button Text="Submit" AutomationId="SubmitButton" />
<Entry Placeholder="Email" AutomationId="EmailField" />
<Label x:Name="resultLabel" AutomationId="ResultLabel" />
```

The agent finds elements by:
1. `AutomationId` (accessibility ID)
2. `x:Name` (name attribute)
3. Visible text (label/text attribute)

## Troubleshooting

### "No booted iOS simulator found"

```bash
xcrun simctl boot "iPhone 16 Pro"
# or
python automate.py --boot-simulator "iPhone 16 Pro"
```

### "No Android device/emulator found"

```bash
# Start emulator
emulator -avd <avd_name> &

# Or check connected devices
adb devices
```

### "Appium server not running"

```bash
appium --relaxed-security &
# or
python automate.py --start-appium
```

### Element not found

1. Use `--list-buttons` to see available buttons
2. Use `--list-elements` to see all elements with IDs
3. Use `--page-source` to get full XML tree
4. Verify `AutomationId` is set in XAML

### Android "Fast Deployment" crash

**Symptom**: App crashes immediately on launch with error:
```
No assemblies found in '.../__override__/arm64-v8a' or '<unavailable>'. 
Assuming this is part of Fast Deployment. Exiting...
```

**Cause**: Debug builds use "Fast Deployment" which doesn't embed assemblies in the APK. The assemblies are pushed separately by Visual Studio/dotnet tooling. When launched via Appium (outside VS), the app can't find the assemblies.

**Fix**: Build with embedded assemblies:
```bash
dotnet build -f net9.0-android -p:EmbedAssembliesIntoApk=true
```

Or use a Release build which embeds assemblies by default.

**Note**: The agent already sets `appium:noReset=true` by default to preserve app state between sessions.

### Slow performance / Session startup

**Symptom**: Each CLI call takes 10-50 seconds on iOS.

**Cause**: Each CLI invocation creates a new Appium/WebDriverAgent session. Session startup is slow, especially on iOS (~10-50s).

**Fix 1**: Use session caching with `--keep-session` and `--reuse-session`:
```bash
# First call creates session and keeps it alive (~10s)
python automate.py --platform ios --app-id com.example --keep-session --tap Field1

# Subsequent calls reuse the session (~2s each!)
python automate.py --platform ios --app-id com.example --reuse-session --keep-session --type Field1 "text"
python automate.py --platform ios --app-id com.example --reuse-session --keep-session --list-elements

# When done, end the session
python automate.py --end-session
```

**Fix 2**: Chain multiple operations in a single CLI call:
```bash
# 1 session for all operations - executed IN ORDER specified!
python automate.py --platform ios --app-id com.example \
  --tap Field1 --type Field1 "text" --get-text Result --expect Result "success"
```

**Note**: Actions are executed in the order you specify on the command line. You can interleave actions as needed:
```bash
# Type, check value, type more, check again
--type Amount 100 --get-text Total --type Tip 20 --expect Total "€ 120"
```

## Assertions

The `--expect` action is used for automated testing. It checks if an element contains expected text:

```bash
# Pass: exits 0
python automate.py --platform ios --app-id com.example --expect Label "expected text"

# Fail: prints failure and exits 1
python automate.py --platform ios --app-id com.example --expect Label "wrong"
# Output: ✗ expect 'Label' contains 'wrong': FAIL (actual: expected text)
```

Use `--expect` in test scripts to verify UI state after actions:
```bash
python automate.py --platform ios --app-id com.example \
  --type SubtotalEntry 100 \
  --set-slider TipSlider 20 \
  --expect TipAmountValue "€ 20,00" \
  --expect TotalValue "€ 120,00"
```

## Platform Feature Matrix

| Feature | iOS | Android | Mac Catalyst |
|---------|-----|---------|--------------|
| tap | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| type_text | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| swipe | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| long_press | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| double_tap | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| set_slider | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| expect | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| dismiss_keyboard | ✅ | ✅ | ❌ |
| accept_alert | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| press_back | ❌ | ✅ | ❌ |
| orientation | ✅ | ✅ | ❌ |
